APPENDIX C
Transcripts for Lectures
Lecture 1 (from Chapter 1, page 21)
Class: Anthropology
Topic: Cross-Cultural Perceptions of Time
Different cultures often have entirely different perceptions of time. The cultural anthropologist Edward T. Hall popularized the idea that cultures use time and view time in very different
ways. The idea of the past, present, and future—and the whole concept of scheduling or managing time—can be so different that it leads to cross-cultural miscommunications. In Hall’s
1990 book The Dance of Life, Hall writes, “Time is one of the fundamental bases on which all
cultures rest and around which all activities revolve. Understanding the difference between
monochronic time and polychronic time is essential to success.”
Hall’s notion of monochronism and polychronism can be understood as follows. Monochronic time is linear. Events are scheduled one at a time, one event following another. To a
monochronic culture, this type of schedule is valued over interpersonal relationships. On the
other hand, polychronic time is characterized by many things happening simultaneously. In
addition, interpersonal relationships are highly valued in polychronic cultures.
Hall’s theory is that monochronic time can be found primarily in North American and
Northern European cultures. These cultures emphasize schedules, punctuality, and preciseness. They also emphasize “doing” things. They are cultures that value productivity, that value
getting things done “on time.” They view time as something that can be lost, killed, or
wasted—or, conversely, they view time as something that can, or should, be managed, planned,
and used efficiently.
Polychronic time, on the other hand, can be found primarily in Latin American, African,
and Native American cultures. Their perception of time is more connected to natural rhythms.
It is connected to the earth, to the seasons. This makes sense when we consider that natural
events can occur spontaneously, sporadically, or concurrently. Polychronic cultures view time as
being somewhat flexible. Since life isn’t so predictable scheduling and being precise simply
isn’t that important. In addition, relationships with people are valued more than making
schedules. There is more value placed on “being” than on “doing.”
Different cultural perceptions of time can lead to conflict, especially in the business world.
The idea of being late versus on time for a meeting, for example, might differ widely between
an American businessperson and a Brazilian; the American businessperson might be far less
tolerant of a Brazilian’s late arrival. However, the Brazilian businessperson might be offended
by an American’s insistence on punctuality or on getting right down to business; the Brazilian
would generally prefer to finish talking with colleagues first, and would not want to cut a conversation short in order to make an appointment.
230

Some traditional time management programs used in the business world might not translate well in another culture. Traditional time management programs in the business world emphasize to-do lists and careful scheduling. They are monochronic. However, a business in a
polychronic culture might not adjust well to that system. Companies who impose these monochronic systems on places of business in polychronic cultures might be guilty of ethnocentrism,
which means making their own ethnic or cultural values central and not valuing other values.
Edward Hall’s theory of monochronic and polychronic cultures has been challenged by
some critics. Some people think it is overly general. They argue that within any cultural group
we might find people who think of time differently. In other words, a primarily polychronic
culture might have both monochronic and polychronic types of people. The same diversity
among individuals might be found in a primarily monochronic culture. Critics of anthropologists like Edward Hall feel that it’s more useful to think of time differences among individuals, not just between cultural groups.
Lecture 2 (from Chapter 2, page 51)
Class: Psychology
Topic: Three Systems of Memory
Psychologists have many theories to explain how we remember information. The most influential theory is that memory works as a kind of storage system, or storehouse, for information.
According to this theory, there are three types of these storage systems with different functions
that hold information for different amounts of time. These storage systems are sensory memory, short-term memory, and long-term memory.
Sensory memory holds information for the shortest amount of time—less than four seconds. An instant. Sensory memory is where stimuli, or things that stimulate our senses, are
very briefly stored. We forget sensory memories almost instantly, unless they pass into another
storage system. Examples of stimuli that usually go into sensory memory are things that we
see and hear in the world such as a flash of lightning, or the sound of a door closing.
Short-term memory, which is also sometimes called “working memory,” holds information for about 15 to 25 seconds. This is not a very long time, but the information that passes
into this system has more meaning for us than just sensory stimulation. It is not entirely clear
how some sensory memories transfer into more meaningful short-term memories. Some experts believe that sensory information changes into visual images as it is stored, and others believe that information changes into words. However, it has been proven that memory going
into this system is made up of “chunks,” or groups, of meaningful information (for example,
single letters or numbers or more complicated sets of information), and that only around seven
“chunks” of information can be stored in short-term memory. Therefore, there is not a lot of
room for information in short-term memory, and it does not stay there for very long. Examples of the type of information that typically goes into short-term memory are telephone
numbers, addresses, and names.
Appendix C ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 231

Long-term memory holds information almost indefinitely, although retrieving it can
sometimes be difficult. Think of long-term memory as a very big library, or even a computer
chip, with almost unlimited capacities for storage. Information gets filed, catalogued, and
stored. Long-term memory has several different components, or modules, that correspond to
separate memory systems in the brain. The main two categories of long-term memory are declarative memory and procedural memory. Declarative memory is where we store factual information, such as names, faces, dates, life events. Procedural memory is where we store
memory of skills and habits, like how to ride a bike or how to boil an egg. Within declarative
memory, there are smaller categories of memory, or subdivisions—episodic memory and semantic memory. Episodic memory is where we place memories that relate to our personal
lives, things we have done or experienced, such as having a car accident, celebrating an important birthday, or graduating from school. Semantic memory is where we organize general
knowledge or facts about the world, such as math formulas, spelling rules, and capital cities.
Lecture 3 (for Chapter 3, page 76)
Class: Sociology
Topic: Ingroups and Outgroups
In the last class, we discussed the nature of groups: how they are formed, and what characteristics they have in common. Today we will focus on two particular types of groups: what sociologists call “ingroups” and “outgroups.”
Let’s clarify the definitions of each type of group, and then we’ll look at some examples.
First of all, what is an ingroup? Most of us are members, on some level, of at least one ingroup. These are people with whom you feel a close attachment or connection, with whom
you identify strongly. An example of an ingroup could be a person’s family, or a close group of
friends. Members of an ingroup may all dress in a similar style, or listen to similar music, or
use a similar way of speaking—they may even have their own specialized words for certain
things. However, ingroups typically define themselves not just in relation to the members of
that group, but in relation to other groups that are different from the ingroup.
These other groups, in contrast to the ingroup, are called outgroups. An outgroup is a
group that is viewed from the perspective of an ingroup, often in negative terms. Members of
an ingroup may feel a sense of difference or separateness from the outgroup. They may feel excluded. They may even feel a strong sense of opposition or conflict with the outgroup—or
even hatred. Outgroups help to define ingroups by providing the ingroup with a sense of identity against or in opposition to them. The ingroup may magnify, or emphasize, certain characteristics that make them distinctly different from the outgroup. In other words, one person’s
ingroup is another person’s outgroup. To illustrate, members of a neighborhood gang may
wear certain types of clothing to differentiate themselves from rival gangs, or from non-gang
members—members of the dominant or mainstream culture. As another example—and an
even more extreme one—countries or cultures at war may emphasize their difference from the
232 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Appendix C

country they are at war with, in order to increase unity and loyalty in their ingroup. This leads
to an “us versus them” mentality, that, in turn, can increase any existing conflict even as it
strengthens the ingroup’s sense of identity.
Ingroups and outgroups tend to view one another in very separate terms, and they usually
have little or no interaction with each other. As a result, these groups don’t have a lot of real
information or firsthand experience with one another. And as a consequence of the lack of information, they rely heavily on stereotypes and misinformation about each other. The stereotypes then reinforce the ingroup’s mistrust of or hatred toward the outgroup.
Indeed, ingroups and outgroups come into conflict most frequently over symbolic representations of the groups: objects or places that hold a great deal of meaning for one group, and
that symbolize, or stand for, the group in some way. An obvious example of this can be seen in
how one country may seek to destroy a flag, a statue, or a building that represents a country it
is at war with. During the conflict in Iraq, for example, a statue of Saddam Hussein was toppled and dragged through the streets as a symbol of an outgroup. Destroying the objects and
symbols associated with one group can be a way of imagining that they are destroying the
group itself. It’s important to clarify, however, that the symbol itself isn’t the cause of the
conflict—it’s the meaning attached to the symbol, a point at which members of an ingroup
can express their identity as distinct from the outgroup, and a point at which the ingroup can
act out its emotions toward an opposing group.
Lecture 4 (for Chapter 4, page 108)
Class: Philosophy / Ethics
Topic: Social Inventions
How important is it for people to contribute to society in some way? After the tragedy of
9/11, some people have become preoccupied with this question. Tragedies have a way of making people rethink their values and find a new focus. They make people think, on some level,
about what a society needs in order to survive. Not just basic needs like food, clothing, and
shelter, but deeper needs, relating to the health and values of society. Many people find themselves asking: how can I find more meaning in our society? What can I do to make a difference? For some, these questions may lead to practical decisions; others ask these questions and
find themselves setting foot on a more spiritual path.
The notion of doing something to take control of society or of our fate as humans is not
something that developed just after 9/11. We might date this impulse back to ancient times,
when the Greeks believed that humans were subservient to the gods, and that both gods and
humans were powerless under fate. What was fated to happen was going to happen, and there
was nothing that they could do about it. However, this way of thinking changed, arguably,
with the rise of the great city of Athens. The social critic John Ralston Saul reminds us of how
the Greeks constructed both new styles of buildings and new structures of civilization. The
Greeks began to believe in the power of ingenuity, or the notion that creative, imaginative
Appendix C ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 233

thinking could lead to humans’ ability to shape their own futures. They could use their own
ingenuity, and the tools at hand, to make life better. They did not have to be subject to fate.
Their thinking changed, in other words, from a passive approach to an active one.
Perhaps somewhere in the late 20th century we began to lose sight of this active way of
thinking. According to John Ralston Saul, the notion of “fate” returned with new faces—
globalization, the market, or even technology. People in Western society began to feel powerless in the face of these large, looming forces that were shaping our society for us. Now, in the
early 21st century, we may be seeing another change similar to the ones that the Greeks experienced, according to another cultural critic, Jon Spayde. In the wake of 9/11, perceiving a
need for significant social change and new values, people who call themselves “social inventors” are trying to take back some control over society’s direction once again.
A social inventor is not necessarily a social activist. An activist fights for social change.
Nor is a social inventor a social contributor; a social contributor might be someone who supports social causes financially, or emotionally. And finally, a social inventor is not necessarily
someone who works in a high-tech industry or invents new technologies and consumer products. A social inventor is different because he or she is using the power of ingenuity, or creative
thinking, to come up with ideas for change in certain communities or sections of society. Social inventors have a vision of a better world and create new systems or practices. Their ideas
may seem offbeat or impossible. Most social inventors are not famous or wealthy because of
their inventions. They are usually quite ordinary people; they may even be people you know.
Or we may never know who they are. But some of these creative thinkers have powerfully, and
quietly, changed the way we live.
Some examples of social inventions may sound familiar to you. The organization of “Alcoholics Anonymous,” a support group for people with addiction to alcohol, was founded in
1935 and has been going strong ever since. This was a social invention because an individual
named Bill Smith, himself a recovering alcoholic, came up with a 12-step process for creating
personal change. The idea caught on, communities and support groups formed around it, and
millions of alcoholics have changed their lives ever since.
Another example of a social invention is the organization Amnesty International, which
was founded in 1961. A British lawyer named Peter Benenson wrote an editorial after two
Portuguese students were imprisoned for toasting freedom in a café, and the international organization to support human rights began. Now millions of people around the world write letters to protest human rights violations.
Social inventions do not have to be organizations, however. Sometimes they are new designs for neighborhoods or communities, allowing for more interaction among people. Sometimes they are systems, like new ways to help prisoners in jails receive an education or re-enter
society. Sometimes they are very simple ideas, examples of new ways of thinking or “thinking
outside the box” to solve problems. For example, some movie theatres in Boston and New
York have recently started implementing a social invention to solve the problem of babies crying in movie theatres. To accommodate parents with babies, who would like to keep up with
current movies, some theatres now offer special “mother’s hours,” a daytime showing of a film
234 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Appendix C

in which they are free to bring babies or young children. The lights are not turned down as low
so that they can keep an eye on their children while they watch the movie.
The idea of social inventions or social ingenuity has become so popular in recent years that
“Idea Banks” of social inventions have shown up on the World Wide Web, books have been
published on the subject, and Institutes have been founded. The Institute for Social Inventions,
based in London, connects think tanks and idea banks throughout Europe. It has a website that
invites ideas from anyone and that I’ll write here on the board: www.globalideasbank.org. You
can search this website by category to see the types of ideas that ordinary people come up
with. Looking at a wide range of them gives you some sense of the extent to which people desire to make a difference in our society and not remain powerless.
Lecture 5 (for Chapter 5, page 139)
Class: Psychology
Topic: Causes and Effects of Stress
Everyone experiences stress on some level every day. Stress, broadly defined, is our response to
events that we perceive as threatening or challenging. We may experience different levels of
stress depending on the stressors, meaning the events or circumstances that cause us to feel stress.
Of course, not everyone perceives the same events or circumstances as stressful; we don’t
always react the same way to the same stressors. In fact, something that is extremely stressful
for one person may be exciting and non-stressful for another. In general, though, stressful
events can be classified into three main categories: cataclysmic events, personal stressors, and
background stressors. Cataclysmic events are major events that cause stress suddenly, immediately, for a great many people at once. Examples of these are earthquakes, fires, or other disasters. Personal stressors are major life events that create stress. They can include the death of a
loved one, a job loss, a divorce, a financial setback, or a geographical move. They are not always events that we would perceive as negative; many “joyful” life events can also cause a great
deal of stress. For example, getting engaged or married, acquiring a new family member
(through birth or adoption), starting a new job, and even taking a vacation can all be as stressful as “negative” life events. Finally, background stressors—which we can also think of as dayto-day hassles, or minor irritations—can cause stress, particularly when they add up, when we
are repeatedly exposed to them. Examples of background stressors are waiting in a long line,
getting stuck in a traffic jam, being exposed to noise, experiencing a delay of some sort, or
dealing with broken equipment. Examples of chronic background stressors—and the kind that
can lead to long-term health problems—include being unhappy with one’s job, living environment, marriage, or relationship.
Stress is not something that only exists in our mind. Repeated exposure to stressors has
both psychological and biological consequences. When we are exposed to stressors, our adrenal glands secrete certain hormones, and our heart rate and blood pressure rise. We experience
Appendix C ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 235

a “fight or flight” response, a sense of emergency, where the body prepares to defend itself. This
is useful in some situations, especially where we might actually need to defend ourselves. In the
long run, though, this activation of what is known as the sympathetic nervous system has negative effects and reduces our capacity to manage stress. When stress hormones are constantly
secreted, and the body is continually preparing for emergencies, body tissues such as the heart
and blood vessels can begin to deteriorate. The immune system functions less effectively, and
reduces our ability to fight off illnesses. Some people who complain of repeated exposure to
highly stressful circumstances tend to report the following types of symptoms: aches and pains
(headaches and backaches are common), skin rashes, digestive problems, and fatigue.
The General Adaptation Syndrome, or G.A.S., explains the sequence of physiological reactions to stress. There are three phases to G.A.S. The first is the “alarm and mobilization”
phase. This is when we first become aware of a stressor. When we respond with alarm, we may
feel upset or confused. We may even feel a sense of panic or fear. After that, however, we may
begin to mobilize our efforts—in other words, to take action to remove the stressor. For example, if you received a mid-semester report stating that your grades were all very low, you might
worry at first, but then you would probably make plans to reverse the situation, to improve
your grades. It is during this first phase that the sympathetic nervous system is activated and
the body responds with a sense of emergency.
The second phase of G.A.S. is the resistance stage, which occurs if the stressor is not removed. This is the stage when we fight against the stressor or try to cope with the stressor.
The attempt to mobilize and remove the source of stress from phase one can result in further
stress. For example, if you were studying long hours to try to improve low grades, you might
succeed in improving the grades but create more stress in the process.
This can lead to the third G.A.S. phase: exhaustion. In this phrase, if resistance was not
successful and stressors still exist, our ability to fight or cope with the stressor diminishes. At
this point, symptoms of stress manifest themselves psychologically and biologically. Psychologically, we may become irritable, short-tempered, or unable to focus. There may be a sense of
being completely overwhelmed and unable to function. Biologically, our bodies may react with
such symptoms as aches and pains, fatigue, or illnesses. Interestingly, the exhaustion phrase
may actually be an extreme way of trying to avoid the stressors. The body may be telling us
that we need to take a break, that we need to do whatever is necessary to remove ourselves
from the stressor.
Lecture 6 (for Chapter 6, page 180)
Class: American History / American Studies
Topic: The American Dream: Myth or Reality?
The term “American dream” is widely used today. But what exactly does this concept mean?
Where does the term come from? When we talk about the American dream, whose American
dream are we describing? Is the American dream the same for all Americans? Has the meaning of the term changed over time? Is the American dream a uniquely American concept?
236 –––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– Appendix C

Questions like these can complicate a seemingly simple term and lead us to an even more important question: is the American dream a myth or a reality today?
The term “American dream” began to be widely used in 1867. The term was used in a famous novel written by Horatio Alger. The novel, Ragged Dick, was a “rags to riches” story
about a little boy who was orphaned and lived in New York. The boy saved all his pennies,
worked very hard, and eventually became rich. The novel sent the message to the American
public that anyone could succeed in America if they were honest, worked hard, and showed
determination to succeed. No matter what your background, no matter where you were from,
no matter if you had no money or no family, hard work and perseverance would always lead to
success.
Today, the message from Alger’s novel is still a prevalent one in this country. It is still used
to define the American dream. A very basic definition of the American dream is that it is the
hope of the American people to have a better quality of life and a higher standard of living
than their parents. This can mean that each generation hopes for better jobs, or more financial
security, or ownership of land or a home.
However, new versions and variations of the American dream have surfaced since Alger’s
novel was published. For one thing, the basic definition I stated a moment ago—the idea that
Americans are always seeking to improve their lifestyle—also suggests that each generation
wants more than the previous generation had. Some people would argue that this everincreasing desire to improve the quality of one’s life may have started out on a smaller scale, in
the past, but today has led to an out-of-control consumerism and materialism. According to
this view, we not only want more than our parents and our grandparents had, but we also want
more than our friends, our co-workers, and our neighbors have.
Another, more benign view of the American dream is that it is about the desire to create
opportunities for ourselves, usually through hard work. A hallmark of the American dream,
some would argue, is the classic “self-starter,” the person who starts out with very little in
life—little money, few friends, few opportunities—and works hard to make his or her way in
the world. A classic example of this type of American dreamer would be former president
Abraham Lincoln, who was born in a log cabin, was largely self-educated, and yet worked his
way up in the world to eventually become a United States president.
This view of the American dream has also been associated with immigrants and their stories, their quests for a better life in a new country. Americans have long been fascinated by immigrant stories, and many feel great pride about their own families who may have come from
other countries, worked very hard, and created a better life for future generations. The immigrant story is most often a narrative of upward mobility. Immigrants, seeing this country as a
place of new opportunities and possibilities, play a large role in narratives—both fiction and
nonfiction—about pursuing the American dream, and indeed, we could point to many success
stories.
The American dream has also, historically, been associated with westward expansion in
this country. Throughout most of the 1800s, the notion of the frontier—a vast expanse of
largely unclaimed land in the West—symbolized new opportunities and a fresh start to people.
Appendix C ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––––– 237

Many a dreamer set off for the West in search of land, jobs, gold, or other opportunities, often
with next to nothing in his pocket. Unfortunately, this idea of new opportunities in the West
had a negative side. The American West was not unpopulated; Native American Indians already lived there, along with other immigrant groups, and these people were often displaced—
or met with violence—if they interfered with the visions or ideas of westward-migrating
Americans.
A more recent interpretation of the American dream has to do with equality. Civil rights
activists such as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., used some of the rhetoric associated with the
American dream to urge people to work for equal opportunities for all Americans, not just
some Americans. A harsh reality was becoming clear to some people, especially in the 1960s
and 1970s: not everyone had the same opportunities. If people were denied jobs, education, or
other opportunities because of their race, ethnic background, or gender, was the American
dream only a myth? 